Okay, so now we're going to
cross the streams.
We are going to connect XML and databases.
Later we'll do HTML and databases and
JSON and databases, but for
now we're going to do XML and databases.
And we're going to do the music database
that I talked about in the lecture,
except that we're going to
pull out my iTunes library and
put it into a music database.
So it turns out that if you go into iTunes
and you say like file/library/export or
something like that, you get an XML
file that looks exactly like this.
And if we take a look at this XML file,
it is a property list. That's
what plist stands for.
That's a big Apple thing. And then they have
dictionaries, which are key/value pairs.
So it's a key with integer, key/value
pair, key/value, key/value, key/value.
This is just a XML
serialization of dictionaries.
What's interesting is they can have
the dictionary that contains a dictionary
that contains a dictionary.
So if you look through you will
see that there's dictionaries, and
the ones that are actually tracks
have a key of Track ID and
then name, artist, composer,
album, genre, etc.
Does this all look very familiar?
And if you cruise down
you see more tracks.
You see more tracks.
And there are lots and lots of things.
And I've given you, for better or for
worse, I've given you my playlist in XML.
And so what we're basically going to do
is we're going to read this file and
we're going to through
all the dictionary items.
And we're looking for
things that have key of Track ID.
And then we're going to extract the name,
artist, the composer, the album,
the size, the time, etc.,
and pull these things out.
So if you take a look at our code, we're
going to use ElementTree, which we've used
before, and we're going to use SQLite
as our way to talk to the database.
And so by this point some of this
should become pretty normal.
We're going to establish a connection
that trackdb.sqlite is the disk,
the file on disk.
Then we get ourselves a cursor because
the cursor is the way we
actually send the commands.
And the first thing we're going
to do is create some tables.
And we use a little different technique
here. If we want to reset this,
we actually just remove this
file then it recreates it.
And I'm using a CREATE
TABLE IF NOT EXISTS.
And so this is a way that basically says
this does absolutely nothing if the table
already exists.
So this code can run many, many times.
The other examples,
I show you how to drop the table.
It's up to you how you do this.
And it depends often on how your
application is going to work.
So this basically says create the table
if it doesn't exist, using the ID and
name, and all the stuff.
An the thing that's a little
different here is this name is unique.
And we're going to use it as logical key.
So I'm going to add a little
unique attribute to this,
to say I can't store two of
two identical names in there.
And I'm doing this very much on purpose,
which you're going to see in a bit.
So I'm going to create the Artist table,
I'm going to create the Album table.
Again this is just triple-quoted strings.
And I'll create the Track table
pretty much right off of those things.
Now I haven't done Genre yet, I'm trying to
keep this one a little bit simpler.
And so then what we do is we
read the name of the file.
And if I press enter I'll use Library.xml,
which is this exact file here.
And then I create a function, which we'll
go back and talk to here, called lookup,
that basically is our way of going through
a dictionary and finding like name,
find the key, and then go to the exact
next tab and find the value.
So it's a way to parse key/value pairs
out of this XML dictionary object.
But we'll come back to that in a second.
And so what we do here is we are going
to call ET, ElementTree.parse.
And if you use the parse method inside
of ElementTree, then you just give it
a file name. So we don't have to even read
this file, because ElementTree is doing
the file reading for us. And then we get
an object, stuff, that we can work with.
And similar to our previous thing,
in that object
we're going to call the findall method.
And we're looking for three-deep
dictionaries.
A dictionary within a
dictionary within a dictionary.
And so, that's basically dictionary
within dictionary within dictionary.
And so it's all these dictionaries
at the third level in.
I mentioned before that XML was better at
dealing with hierarchical data than JSON.
And actually, these will probably
be equivalent in JSON and XML,
but we're saying I'm going to go through
all the dictionaries that are three deep.
And so then I get a number of them,
some number.
I print out how many of these things.
I get kind of an array of
objects at that point.
And then I loop through them all.
And so this loop, for entry in all, well
all is just a list of this is the first
dictionary, and
this is the second dictionary,
and the third dictionary, and so
that way I'm looping through the XML bits.
Each of the entry value, you know for
each time it goes through the loop,
entry is basically the XML object
that represents a dict object, right?
D-I-C-T object.
And so I have written a thing that starts
here and looks for one of these things,
whatever string I want to read,
and then it looks to the next one.
So, if you take a look at that code,
that's this lookup.
And so, what it does is it,
d is an iterable, so
I can iterate through all the tags.
That's a tag, that's a tag, that's a tag,
that's a tag, that's a tag.
And all I'm doing is, I'm looking for
the key that I'm looking for, right?
And I say found, because found is false.
And if the child.tag name is key, and
the text in between them, remember
that the text is this stuff in between.
So that's the .text.
This is the name of the tag,
this is the text within the tag.
So, if the tag I found is a key tag and
the stuff in between the tag is,
I probably misused it, is
this key I'm looking for,
which is like the string name or whatever.
I'm using the key twice.
But, okay, whatever.
I say found equals true and
then it goes up and then next time through
the loop it returns the child's text.
And that way I can loop through.
Loop through [SOUND] looking for
total time, I find total time, and
then I go to the next tag and
I return the text for that.
And so that's how I can loop
through this whole structure,
find that thing, and
return that thing, right?
And whatever, I might find the artist's
name and then return Queen. Okay?
So that basically is my little gadget that
takes one of these dictionary entries and
returns the thing I want.
So then I've got lookup.
And so I don't want things that
aren't tracks.
So I just check to see.
Oh, and by the way, my little guy
returns None if there's nothing found,
which is a very Pythonic way to do it.
So if I look the entry Track ID
up in my dictionary,
then if I find None I continue so I'm just
skipping the ones that aren't real tracks.
Then I'm going to pull out the name,
artist, album, count, rating and
length using these,
our little keys that sit in this XML.
All right, zippity do da into XML. And so
now I have variables name, artist, album,
count, rating, and length, and
I'm going to do some sanity checking.
If the name is empty or the artist
is empty, or the album is empty,
I'm going to skip that track,
because I want to have these things.
So I now know that and
I'm going to print out the name,
artist, album, count, rating, and
length. So now I have data, right?
And I'm going to do an INSERT statement.
So, here's the interesting thing.
And this goes back to, in the Artist
table, the name is unique.
Again, I'm going to use
this as my logical key.
The name is unique, so
I can't insert the same name twice and
so if this is Led Zeppelin and
I try to insert Led Zeppelin a second
time that would be a failure.
But I can take and kind of cheatly
take advantage of this, right?
Because it's going to fail,
so I say insert and
kind of think of if something goes
wrong ignore, so INSERT OR IGNORE.
Which means you either insert it
if it's not already there, and
if it's already there, you ignore it.
Okay?
So it's like insert, oops come back,
it's INSERT INTO Artist, but
ignore it if it's already there.
And so Artist is the table, name is
the column, values is a keyword, and
there's one question mark in here.
And that the question mark, of course,
corresponds to the first entry in our
little one-tuple, because that again is
a tuple and it's a one-item tuple.
You've still got to say
parenthesis thing comma blah.
And that's you get a one-tuple.
It's kind of a funky bit Python syntax.
And so that's a tuple.
But the net result is, if the artist
doesn't exist in the table Artist,
it inserts it. If not, it doesn't.
And remember, because I got a
primary key on this guy,
id is going to automatically be assigned.
So the immediate next thing
that I do is I do SELECT id
FROM Artist where name equals this guy,
the one we just inserted.
It might have been inserted a long time
ago or it might have just been inserted.
But no matter what, we're going to get the
id of either the recently inserted one or
the one that's been there, right?
So this INSERT may or may not happen,
but the SELECT is going to happen.
And it's going to give us the id.
And so we're going to use the cursor.
We're going to grab one row. Because
it's unique it should only get one row.
Sub zero means the first thing,
which gives us this id guy.
And then we're just going to put that
in as an integer into artist_id.
So artist_id is the primary
key that got inserted when
that artist got inserted,
if that makes sense.
So this is like a little idiom of
insert or ignore and then select using
the logical key twice to figure out
what the primary key of the artist,
whether we inserted it or
just looked it up.
And then we do a similar thing for
the album title.
Album title I've got marked as unique, right,
the album title here is marked as unique
so I've got that. And so I'm going to
say INSERT OR IGNORE INTO Album.
Now, because Album has a foreign
key to the artist, right,
remember from the lecture, so the title
goes in and the artist_id goes in.
So this is a string and this is
an integer, and I've got two values now,
question mark, question mark, and so
this looks a little more like a two-tuple.
Because it's got parentheses,
album is the first parameter, and
artist_id is the second parameter.
This is a string, that's a number.
And then again the idiom, SELECT id FROM
Album WHERE title equals the logical key.
And fetch one row, grab the first thing,
because there's only
one thing I asked for.
So the sub zero, and
stick that in album_id.
So we do this to the extent that,
that's how we establish
what the primary key of that album is,
whether we inserted it or not.
And then we insert the track, finally.
So we're going to do this one
a little bit differently.
Now I don't think the data we're
looking at would have any duplicates,
but what if it did?
So we're going to do an INSERT OR REPLACE.
So an insert, INSERT INTO, would
fail if the key was already there,
because I made title a unique key,
right there.
I made title unique indicating to some
degree that it's going to be a logical
key and I only want one row with a title,
I don't allow duplicates.
So this don't allow duplicates
sometimes if would blow you up, or
sometimes you can use it to trigger,
with these insert or ignores, or insert or
replaces, to create behavior
that you want to create.
This is an example where
you're using a CREATE TABLE
to set rules that you think are terrible
rules, but then you're like, whoa, no, no,
I'm taking advantage of those rules.
So you put rules into the CREATE statement
that then you can take advantage of
as a software developer.
So, INSERT OR REPLACE.
And what that says is, if the title
doesn't exist, then insert the rows.
If it does, then update it. Okay?
Now you won't change the title,
but you would update all the rest of it.
Now we could do this with two lines.
We could do a SELECT.
We could check if it's already there.
We could do an INSERT
if it wasn't there and an
UPDATE if it was there, or
we can do all this in one line.
And when you're dealing with SQL, the
extent to which you can condense three or
four SQL statements into one is actually
something you really like a lot.
And so, how can I do this in one
SQL statement is actually a very
very common question.
And so we're going to do INSERT OR
REPLACE INTO Track and then we
got the pieces - the title, the album, id,
foreign key, which we have to explicitly
put in; the length, rating, and count, which
we simply pulled in from the XML.
Now these might be None, and
if these variables are None it
will insert a null in that field.
And so we have five little question
marks and then a five-tuple.
This is a second parameter which is a
five-tuple, which is the name, the album_id,
the length, the rating, and the count.
And then we say commit to make sure
the whole thing gets written to disk.
And then we're done.
We're absolutely all done.
So we're reading some XML,
we're parsing the XML,
we're doing some sanity
checking on the XML.
We print and then we're
establishing the primary keys and
then using them like a statement later.
And I said to you,
it's a lot easier in Python,
because you don't have to write a little
note about what that primary key was, so
you can put it in
a later insert statement.
So we don't really worry about it.
Python's taking care of all these for us.
Insert it, get the primary keys,
stick that stuff in.
Okay.
So let's go run it.
Which will be, hopefully it will work.
Hopefully it will work.
Do, do, do.
Okay.
So I'm in the Tracks database.
And there we go.
So you'll notice that there
is no file there and I say,
python tracks.py, and
it's just going to read that XML file,
[SOUND] parse, parse, parse,
and then I'll just hit enter.
And so there it goes, it just read,
it found the title,
it found the podcast.
None and None are things like it must have
no length and it must have something.
Oh no, it must have no count and
no rating, because those would be rating.
So there's rating and count, or
count and rating, I don't know.
But it ran, it just went and ran.
And so let's go take a look at
that database.
So let me open a file.
Open Database and then go into Track,
Tracks, Tracks.
And then there it is.
That file didn't exist, but now that
we have run it, that file now exists.
And here we go,
we can take a look at the data.
Whoosh, all kinds of stuff.
Let's start from
the outside of the tree in.
Let's go to Artist,
which is kind of the leaf of the tree.
So here are all my artists.
And you see I have 317 different artists.
And it just inserted,
maintained, made use of them.
These are now the primary keys for
these things.
They don't go up in order, which I don't
fully understand why, but I don't care,
that's fine.
All that matters is Queen is 1 and
Rammstein is 2.
Various is, Pink Floyd,
Led Zeppelin, AC/DC.
You can see I have a strange
set of tastes in my thing.
So then we have albums, right?
So the Album has nothing
but titles, right?
And it has an artist_id,
which is a foreign key, and
then it has a primary key, right?
And then if we go to the Track,
the Track has a title.
It has a primary key.
album_id is a foreign key.
Length, rating, and
count are just data inside of it.
And so you can kind of play with this and
you can run SELECT statements on it,
you can do whatever.
So in a way writing this all in Python
is a whole bunch easier than doing
it by hand, because we get to have those
primary keys for the artist and the album,
and we just put them in variables and
we pass them back into the SQL.
And away they go.
So I think this is a pretty cool, this
like, brings a lot of things together for
me that we've been working on for
this whole class.
So I hope you enjoy this
example as much as I did.